# PROJECT
# National-Health-Insurance-Scheme-Repo

# Description
The influence of national health insurance scheme on the quality of health care in wenchi municipality of Ghana (ACT 493, UDS-Ghana)

# SUMMARY OF PROJECT
The increasing cost of healthcare delivery has become a major issue in both the developed and developing countries. Resultantly, health policy makers are faced with competing alternatives for the systems of healthcare financing. Health Insurance scheme is seen as viable alternative to providing a more sustainable and equitable health delivery system in countries. This study examined the influence of National Health Insurance Scheme on the quality of healthcare delivery in the Wenchi municipality in the Brong-Ahafo Region of Ghana. The study adopted quantitative and qualitative techniques through structured questionnaires and in-depth interviews for respondents who are insured on the NHIS and those who had not in four (two urban and two rural) selected communities in the Wenchi Municipality. A total of 330 structured questionnaires were administered to respondents. A binary logit model anda Mann Whitney U test were used to analyse the data using SPSS version 16 and Minitab. 


Findings from the study showed that socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the people such as; age, sex, educational status, employment status, income status, health status, distance to NHIS accredited health facilities and type of health facility mostly attended, negatively influenced enrollment of the people on to the scheme with sex and educational status significant at 5% level while health status, distance to NHIS accredited health facilities, type of health facility mostly attended, were highly significant at 1% level. However, age, employment status, and income status were not significant. All these had a negative influence on the enrollment of people regarding the scheme. On the other hand, marital status highly significant at 1% and premium of the scheme not significant at 5% level influenced the people positively to be enrolled. 


Furthermore, there was a significant difference in the perceptions of the insured and uninsured about the quality of healthcare they received. Therefore, the study recommends among other things that the NHIA should intensify their regular monitoring accredited health centres to assess their services under the scheme to ensure an optimal operation of the scheme. In this regard, regular workshops should be organized for hospital information officers to update them on any changes in the scheme. Also, the NHIA should ensure a decentralization of the National Health Insurance Scheme in the municipality and should ensure an improvement in the quality of healthcare services for Insured People in other to avoid it subscribers from switching to the hitherto obnoxious ‘‘Cash and Carry’’ System.

# KEY FINDINGS 
The study employed questionnaire, in-depth interview and direct observation to gather data from the field. The questionnaires were used to solicit views from two groups of people; those who are enrolled on the NHIS and those not enrolled. On the other hand, interview guides were developed for hospital administrators, hospital information officers, and the public relation officer of the NHIS office.

The study adopted a multi- stage approach. First of all, four communities (Wenchi, Subinso, Droboso, and Nchiraa) were selected using purposive sampling. This was based on the characteristics of the areas (urban or rural) in addition to availability of an accredited NHIS health facility. 

The first objective was to show socio-economic and demographic conditions’ influence on utilisation of NHIS by people in rural and urban communities, a Binary logit model was used to show the relationship between demographic, institutional and NHIS factors and a person’s enrollment on the scheme.

The second objective was to determine the difference in people’s perception of the NHIS and the quality of healthcare received by insured and uninsured people in health centres, and here, the Mann-Whitney U test was used and the result showed a real difference existing between the perceptions of those enrolled on the scheme and that of those not enrolled.

A total of three hundred and thirty people were selected through random sampling to answer questions about their enrollment, utilisation and challenges they faced in using the scheme. Wenchi had 211 people selected, Subinso had 52 people, Droboso had 34 and Nchiraa had 33 people. 

In conclusion, some findings were made, leading to some conclusions being drawn. Following this, some recommendations have been made to ensure the NHIS has an enhanced contribution to the people’s healthcare.

* The study revealed that, the implementation of the scheme has generally contributed positively to the people’s healthcare in the municipality. According to three health information officers, general mortality has significantly reduced in the area since the inception of the scheme. Yet, there are more people who had not been enrolled to benefit from the services of the scheme. In this regard, the paradox in view was why some respondents had not been enrolled and yet they could not afford to pay for their hospital bills out-of-pocket.
   
* Consequently, it was found that, socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the people such as age, sex, educational status, employment status, income status, health  status, distance to NHIS accredited health facility and type of health facility mostly attended, negatively influenced enrollment of the people on to the scheme with sex and  educational status significant at 5% level, and health status, distance to NHIS accredited health facility, type of health facility mostly attended, are highly significant at 1% 
level. However, age, employment status, and income status were not significant. All these had a negative influence on the enrollment of people regarding the scheme. On the other hand, marital status highly significant at 1% and premium of the scheme not significant at 5% level influenced the people positively to be enrolled. 

* Furthermore, perception of the people about quality of healthcare they received under the scheme (prompt attention, Doctors examination, treatment advice, availability of drugs     and overall satisfaction) affected their use of the scheme. Thus, the results showed a negative significant difference in the perceptions of those who had been enrolled on the  scheme and those who had not been enrolled. Those enrolled perceive to be receiving healthcare that is not quality as compared to the quality of healthcare receive by those not enrolled.

* Also, the study revealed that, on the average, 0.79 representing (79%) of the insured respondents reported that they were willing to pay more for improvement in the quality of   the healthcare services under the NHIS for the reason that they had been impressed with the services of the scheme while on the average 0.21 representing 21% of them reported  that they were not willing to pay more. Moreover, an average of 0.754 reported that they find it convenient to go to the hospital with their NHIS cards because they don’t have to  pay anything whilst on the average, 0.246 reported that they don’t find it easy.

* The study also found out that the public health facilities had not seen an improvement in their facilities to match the increasing number of people being enrolled on the scheme. This has resulted in some of the challenges such as long queues and delays for respondents and is a great deterrent for utilisation of the services of the scheme in the long run.

* Finally, for the overall results, almost all the variables that pertained to the use of health facilities impacted negatively on people’s continuous use of the NHIS. In other  words people who used the services of the NHIS will not hesitate to stop using the scheme if they do not receive the services they expect from providers. Since the health centres    providing these services for the NHIS is part of the whole health system, it is rational that the NHIS puts necessary tools in place to ensure delivery of the best services to its    clients. The study revealed that, there was very little monitoring by the NHIA at the various accredited health facilities due to inadequate human resources, inadequate logistics   (Government support in areas such as the lack of vehicles, motors and funds to enhance movements of officers to do effective monitoring of the scheme’s services) and network   problems. These challenge leaves room for fraudulent activities to go on in some health accredited health facilities which does not foretell well the scheme. In the long run, it 
is those insured who will suffer. For instance, most respondents did not know that they could take NHIS prescription forms to accredited pharmacy shops for unavailable drugs while  in some cases respondents were made to pay for some services which are covered by the scheme.
   
# CONCLUSION
The study assessed the Influence of National Health Insurance Scheme on the quality of healthcare in Wenchi Municipality. Factors (age, sex, marital status, employment, income, ill-health and) were uses and people’s registration and their perception about the quality of healthcare they receive were also considered. The results obtained showed that, demographic characteristics such as age, sex, family size, employment status, ill- health, income, and current medical expenditure negatively influenced the people’s enrollment on to the scheme with both family size and current medical expenditure at a high significant level and therefore having a high negative impact on the utilisation of the services of the scheme. For instance as income and age increased, the probability of the people registering or renewing their membership with the scheme decreased. They preferred to pay out –of- pocket and use private hospitals rather than public NHIS accredited health centres. This is consistent with other studies done by Palacio- Vieira and Jehu- Appiah and others that showed that families with affluence preferred specialist hospitals. Moreover, distance between residences of respondents and accredited health centres where they accessed healthcare also had a negative influence on utilisation of the scheme at a high significant level. Thus, respondents were challenged travelling long distances to seek for healthcare. Contrariwise, education positively influenced the enrollment of more people on to the scheme at a high significant level. This can be explained by the fact that they had much knowledge about the scheme and its policy 

Furthermore, there was a significant difference in respondents’ perception about the quality of healthcare both the insured and uninsured received in health centres. Thus, the insured perceived the services they received in the health centres to be substandard compared to that received by uninsured people.
